Good day, brothers and sisters.
Our next session will begin
with a music-video presentation.
This afternoon’s music-video presentation
shows the joy of our brothers
around the earth
as they share in giving a witness.
It also reminds us that we
can always rely on Jehovah for support.
Let’s watch and listen.
The opening song for this session highlights
the importance of including Jehovah
in one’s marriage.
We invite you to stand
and sing song number 131,
entitled “‘What God Has Yoked Together.’”
Please be seated.
Marriage and family life are not always easy.
The amount of joy you find
in your family depends, in part, on you.
The following four-part symposium
will help husbands, wives,
parents, and children to find joy together
despite imperfections.
Each speaker will introduce the next.
Brother Seth Hyatt,
a helper to the Service Committee,
will present the first talk, entitled
“Cultivate Joy in Your Family
—Husbands, Rejoice in Your Wife.”
Can you imagine
how Adam must have felt
when he
was introduced to Eve?
Actually, we don’t have
to imagine how he felt.
We know that he
was overwhelmed with appreciation.
And he expressed his appreciation
in poetic terms
that are recorded in the Bible.
You remember the words:
“This is at last
bone of my bone
and flesh of my flesh.”
Think about it.
Adam and Eve
had a perfect marriage,
and together
they formed a perfect family.
Of course, with their disobedience,
all of that changed.
Instead of perfection,
they were confronted
with one another’s imperfections.
And in the instant that they
separated themselves from Jehovah,
they began to experience
stress and anxiety
that affected their relationship.
It is a testimony to Jehovah’s love
and wisdom
that despite imperfections
and despite
the stress and anxiety
that have only intensified
in these last days,
the family can still
be a source of joy
—a place of security
and stability.
But for that to happen,
each member of the family
must shoulder his load
of Scriptural responsibility.
In this symposium,
we’re going to consider husbands,
wives, parents, and children,
and how each of us can contribute
to the joy of the family.
To start,
let’s address husbands.
If you are a husband,
how do you view your wife?
Do you view her as Jehovah does?
Do you view her and feel about her
as Adam felt about Eve
when he first met her?
In fact, the Bible helps
us husbands appreciate
that our wives
are a gift from Jehovah.
Do you appreciate the gift?
And are you demonstrating
your appreciation?
For a few minutes this morning,
we’re going to consider four ways
that we husbands
can demonstrate
appreciation for the gift
Jehovah has given us.
If you’re taking notes,
here they are:
(1) It’s important that we assign
our wives honor;
(2) we must invest time
in our relationship;
(3) it’s important that we confine
our romantic interests to our wife;
and (4)
we have to be realistic
in our expectations.
Let’s consider these points
one at a time.
Turn, please, in your Bible
to 1 Peter chapter 3,
and we’re going to read verse 7:
“You husbands, in the same way,
“continue dwelling with them
according to knowledge.
“Assign them honor
as to a weaker vessel,
“the feminine one,
since they are also heirs
“with you
of the undeserved favor of life,
in order for your prayers
not to be hindered.”
Well, Peter leaves us in no doubt
as to who is being addressed,
“you husbands.”
That’s you and me.
He tells us that we
must continue dwelling
with our wives
“according to knowledge.”
The footnote in our Bible says:
“showing them consideration;
understanding them.”
How well do you know your wife?
What do you know
about her background, her upbringing?
You know
what makes her happy.
Do you know why?
You know what’s upsetting to her,
what causes anxiety.
Do you understand why?
It’s important
that we take the time
to get to know our wives
because only then
can we care for their physical,
emotional, and spiritual needs.
And only then can we do
what Peter next says in the verse,
and here’s our main point:
“Assign them honor.”
Assign your wife honor.
And then Peter says
“as to a weaker vessel.”
Now, what does Peter mean
when he refers
to the wife as a weaker vessel?
Do you think he’s betraying
some chauvinistic leaning?
No.
Because he’s already said
‘assign her honor.’
We could illustrate it this way:
Imagine that you have two bowls
exactly the same size,
exactly the same capacity,
but one is made of wood
and the other is made of a very fine,
very expensive porcelain
—both bowls,
both with the same capacity.
But would you handle both
in the same way?
No.
You recognize that the porcelain
is more valuable
and more fragile,
so you handle it
in a different way.
And that’s what Peter
is telling us about our wives.
She is the “weaker vessel,
the feminine one.”
In what way is she weaker?
Certainly not intellectually,
and certainly not spiritually.
Primarily in a physical sense,
we husbands have an advantage.
So we accord our wife honor.
That means we would never
get physical with her,
and certainly we would never
on a pretext pretend
to honor her in public
and then abuse her
in some way in private.
See, that would never work,
would it?
No.
We assign her honor at all times.
And here’s why.
Peter says:
“They are also heirs with you
of the undeserved favor of life.”
Husbands and wives
are on equal footing
before Jehovah
in a spiritual sense.
Both husbands and wives
must “[wash] their robes
and [make] them white
in the blood of the Lamb.”
Jesus did not die
more for husbands
than he did for wives.
And both husbands and wives
have the hope of everlasting life.
So we remember that.
If we don’t,
how does Peter conclude?
“In order for your prayers
not to be hindered.”
The point:
Our dealings with our wife
will have a direct impact
on our personal relationship
with Jehovah.
So assign her honor.
Value what she does for you
and for your family,
and demonstrate your appreciation.
Our second point:
Invest time in your relationship.
It’s so easy—isn’t it?—
for secular work,
theocratic assignments,
and association with others
to rob us of valuable time
that should be spent
with our wives.
Interestingly, when we
were getting to know one another, courting,
we were anxious
for one-on-one time.
That shouldn’t change
when we get married.
So buy out the time,
set it aside, and stick to it.
In that way,
you demonstrate your appreciation
for the gift Jehovah
has given you.
Our third point is highlighted
in Proverbs chapter 5.
So turn there with me, please.
Proverbs chapter 5
—and we’ll begin reading in verse 18:
“May your own fountain be blessed,
[and here’s the point]
“and may you rejoice
“with the wife of your youth,
“a loving doe,
a graceful mountain goat.
“Let her breasts
satisfy you at all times.
“[and then here
again is the point]
May you be captivated
by her love constantly.”
What is the point?
We must confine
our romantic interests
to our wife.
There is no other option.
We want to “rejoice
with the wife of [our] youth.”
We want to “be captivated
by her love.”
That means avoiding
overly-close relationships with other women,
and not just physical relationships
—texting,
videoconferencing,
telephone calls
all constitute a relationship.
So we’re very careful.
We set limits,
and we don’t go beyond them.
And confining
our romantic interests to our wife
includes rejecting
sexual fantasies involving others.
The world makes light
of such fantasizing.
But Jesus helped us to appreciate
that it’s a very serious matter.
You recall his words
in the Sermon on the Mount?
“[Anyone] who keeps on looking
“at a woman
so as to have a passion for her
has already committed adultery
. . . in his heart.”
The point:
Fantasizing is little more
than rehearsing.
So we reject such fantasies
knowing that they
violate Bible counsel,
including Jesus’ very pointed advice.
And they can prevent us
from rejoicing in our wife.
Finally, (4)
be realistic in your expectations.
We husbands are not perfect.
We know that.
Our wives are not perfect.
Don’t you appreciate it when your wife
smooths over your imperfections
and makes you look good?
Well, our wives appreciate it
when we do that for them.
So be alert
for opportunities to do that.
In the following dramatization,
notice how the husband
rejoices in his wife.
I was trying to get caught up on paperwork
for the circuit overseer’s visit.
There was so much to do.
You have to be kidding me.
Oh, you’re home early, Honey.
I sensed something was wrong.
The kids had left a few things out,
and I was a bit preoccupied.
Tough day?
You were supposed to talk
to the girls about this.
They’re making it a habit.
The more I thought about it, though,
I realized it wasn’t just the kitchen.
I guess I was part of the problem.
Or maybe the problem was me.
You see, my wife
is an amazing woman,
so loving.
It would be an understatement
to call her industrious.
And then there’s her infectious joy.
I mean, how could I not love her?
But sometimes it takes
more than saying, “I love you.”
You know, Honey, you’re right.
This is completely unacceptable.
I’ll talk to the girls
as soon as they come through that door.
Thank you. I love you.
I love you too.
Did you notice how the husband
in the video rejoiced in his wife?
He reflected
on her many good works
—her devotion to Jehovah,
the good acts
that she performed for others,
her fine work
in behalf of her family,
her spontaneous joy
that made her
even more beautiful to him.
And as he reflected
on all of those fine things,
what happened?
His appreciation
for his gift deepened,
and he was motivated
to do something about it.
That’s a beautiful example for us.
So rejoice in your wife
by assigning her honor,
by investing time
in your relationship,
by confining
your romantic interests to your wife,
and by being realistic
in your expectations.
If you do, your marriage
and your family
will continue to be
a source of joy,
a place of stability,
and a place of security.
Brother Patrick LaFranca,
a helper to the Personnel Committee
of the Governing Body,
will present the next talk
of the symposium,
“Cultivate Joy in Your Family
—Wives, Rejoice
in Your Husband.”
Christian wives, are you happy?
Do you love being a wife?
Well, probably right now
you’re looking at your husband
and saying, “Of course.”
That’s good.
But could you add
even more joy to your marriage?
You may be thinking,
‘Yes, if only my husband would . . .’
and you finish the sentence.
But I think most husbands would admit
that we have
some room for improvement.
But this talk is for you.
What can you do as a wife
to add joy to your marriage?
Well, one of the first things is
to think about your God-assigned role.
Open, please, to Genesis 2:18.
Now, here Jehovah is going to explain
why he was making a wife for Adam:
“Then Jehovah God said:
“‘It is not good for the man
to continue to be alone.
“‘I am going to make a helper for him,
as a complement of him.’”
So Eve was going to be a helper
as a complement of Adam.
What is a complement?
Well, we feel sure that you sisters
know a lot about complementary colors.
When you go to pick out
an outfit with accessories,
you pick those with colors
that blend well together,
that are a harmonious combination.
Or when you’re making a meal,
you know there are certain foods
that go well with other foods,
or complement, other foods,
like a Korean sister making kimchi
probably will make rice.
Or pasta with cheese,
bacon and eggs, bread and butter
—there are so many combinations
that complement one another.
So when Jehovah God created Eve,
he built into her feminine qualities
that he knew would really work well
with Adam’s masculine qualities.
So Adam and Eve had a prospect
of being a perfectly matched couple
that could work well together.
Eve could be fully happy
in working with her husband
and caring for that garden
—the beautiful home God gave her.
But, of course, we know
that didn’t happen because of sin,
and along with sin, came stress.
And here we are,
descendants of Adam and Eve.
That’s what we’ve got too
—sin and stress.
But Jehovah helps us, doesn’t he?
And he gives us principles
that can help us make a happy marriage.
Please open to Ecclesiastes.
Now, Ecclesiastes 4:9, 10
describe what a partnership
should be like.
So wives, do you think of yourself
as your husband’s partner?
Well, let’s read verse 9:
“Two are better than one
because they have
a good reward for their hard work.”
So your husband has made a decision,
and maybe you think,
‘I don’t know if that’s the best decision.’
But you’re his partner.
So how will you help him?
Well, you’re going to support
that decision;
you’re going to try to make it work.
And what will be your reward?
Well, first of all, you’re
going to accomplish so much more
by working together
than you could individually.
But more than that,
you’re going to strengthen your friendship
and your partnership with your husband.
Now, in verse 10, it adds:
“For if one of them falls,
the other can help his partner up.
“But what will happen to the one who falls
with no one to help him up?”
You may be thinking,
‘Well, my husband is a strong man,’
and probably so.
But inside,
he may be struggling
with serious insecurities.
At times, he may feel like a failure.
Maybe he’s lost his job
and feels like he’s not a good provider.
You’re his partner.
What are you going to do to lift him up?
Probably, you’re going to share with him
some tactful words
of comfort and encouragement.
That’ll be a happy place.
The book of Proverbs
contains much wisdom,
and some of it is directed to wives.
For example, Proverbs 14:1:
“The truly wise woman
builds up her house,
but the foolish one
tears it down with her own hands.”
So if you are wise,
you will build up, or increase,
respect for your husband
on the part of your children and of others.
You don’t want to be foolish
by speaking negatively
—talking about
your husband’s deficiencies or failures;
nor would you want to undermine
his own confidence
by nagging or arguing with him.
You can do so much
to contribute to a happy house.
For example, at mealtimes,
share in the conversation by adding,
perhaps, a spiritual gem
you found in your Bible reading
or a nice experience
or even a humorous story
—something that will lift
the spirits of the whole family.
Now we want to go
to Proverbs chapter 31,
and probably right away you recognize
this is the chapter
that describes a capable wife.
And I think all of you wives
want to be that.
You want to be that “Proverbs 31” wife.
When you read those verses,
you realize that this woman is very busy.
She’s out there
buying household supplies,
caring for the health
and welfare of her family,
helping others in need,
spending money wisely
—diligently caring for all the duties
of a wife, mother, friend, and neighbor.
We think many of you wives
are doing all of those things.
And you do it day in and day out,
and you don’t complain.
And you’re happy
—happy because you’re giving.
And then you’re even happier
when this happens in verse 28:
“Her children rise up
and declare her happy;
her husband rises up and praises her.”
So they do appreciate what you do.
Sometimes they may not express it,
but they do appreciate it.
There is another element
to a very happy marriage,
and that’s expressed in verse 11:
“Her husband trusts her from his heart,
and he lacks nothing of value.”
Trust is so important in a marriage.
A wife must trust her husband,
and a husband must trust his wife.
You’re going to have conversations;
you’re going to express
your innermost feelings and thoughts.
You must not have fear that
that’s going to be shared with others
or that you’ll be belittled in some way.
No, that’s trust
—a very important aspect of marriage.
So you wives, build up your friendship,
your confidence with your husband.
Now, in verse 12, it adds:
“She rewards him with good, not bad,
all the days of her life.”
So wives, reward your husband with good
—support him on what he has to do—
and we know that he
will love you all the more.
It says “all the days of [your] life.”
So “all the days of [your] life,”
build up that friendship with your husband
whether he is a believer or not.
We have to say in behalf
of the thousands
of hardworking elders
and ministerial servants,
without your faithful support,
it would be much more challenging
to care for our responsibilities.
So thank you very much,
dear wives, for what you’re doing.
Now, sometimes you feel obliged
to speak your mind,
and in a trusting relationship,
that’s expected.
But how will you speak your mind?
Notice verse 26:
“She opens her mouth in wisdom;
the law of kindness is on her tongue.”
So yes, you have
something worthwhile to say,
but how you say it is very, very important.
Will the law of kindness
govern your tongue?
If you say it in kindness,
your husband will love you all the more.
Finally, let’s read verse 30:
“Charm may be false,
and beauty may be fleeting,
but the woman
who fears Jehovah will be praised.”
See, above all,
a capable wife who fears Jehovah
is highly valued and is to be praised.
So you dear wives who fear Jehovah,
you worship him with awe and respect.
And that’s so important
because that helps you
to easily be in subjection to your husband
because you know
that this pleases your heavenly Father.
So as you watch
the following dramatization,
notice how the wife
rejoices in her husband.
I was so tired after work
but glad to finally get home, until . . .
You have to be kidding me.
You’re home, Honey.
I knew he had congregation stuff
to work on,
but seriously?
Tough day?
You were supposed
to talk to the girls about this.
They’re making it a habit.
At first, it upset me
that he didn’t say anything,
but then I began to think.
It’s actually something I’ve come to love
about John—his patience.
He doesn’t overreact.
He’s thoughtful, concerned.
He really listens.
It’s why he’s such a good elder
and why we’ve enjoyed
so many blessings together.
Sometimes I forget,
and I could be more patient.
You know, Honey, you’re right.
This is completely unacceptable.
I’ll talk to the girls as soon
as they come through that door.
Thank you. I love you.
I love you too.
Did you notice how the wife
rejoiced in her husband?
Well, when she walked
into that kitchen, she saw the mess;
she wasn’t rejoicing.
And she wanted to say something
to her husband, and she did.
But how did she say it?
Did she yell at him?
No.
She made her point.
How did the husband react?
He didn’t overreact.
He let her think about it,
and he thought about it.
And as she thought about it,
she thought:
‘You know, he didn’t overreact.
‘That’s one of the things
I love about my husband.
He is so patient.’
And then, of course, he talked with her,
and they resolved the issue.
So love triumphed
over any possible argument or anger.
So continue, dear wives,
to rely on Jehovah
as you work
to make your marriage a delight,
and Jehovah will bless and help you.
Brother Gary Breaux,
a helper to the Service Committee,
will now present the next talk
of this symposium:
“Cultivate Joy in Your Family
—Parents, Rejoice in Your Children.”
We’re very happy
to have hundreds of thousands of children
associated
with our congregations worldwide.
You can be assured Jehovah loves
every one of those children.
Well, how can we say that?
Well, one reason is that every child
owes their name to Jehovah God
because he’s the Originator
of life and, in fact,
the Originator
of the family unit as well.
When Jesus was in heaven,
he recognized
and observed
Jehovah’s intense love for children.
And when Jesus
walked the earth,
he reflected
those same qualities toward children.
The psalmist
beautifully expresses
Jehovah’s feelings
about children
in the 127th Psalm
and verse 3.
Well, let’s read that
—Psalm 127:3.
It says: “Look!
“Sons are an inheritance
from Jehovah;
the fruit of the womb
is a reward.”
So not only are our children
a blessing, or “a reward,”
the scripture indicates
that they “are an inheritance” as well.
Yes, they are a gift
to you from Jehovah.
A person who hopes
to inherit something
usually prepare
to receive it
and then takes good care
of it afterward.
I’m sure that’s exactly what you parents
want to do with your children.
Well, children
can bring much joy;
they can
also cause frustration.
So the question is:
How can you find joy in your children
despite living in a stressful world?
One suggestion
is to view your children
the way Jehovah does.
These are special gifts
to you from him.
Love them;
make them feel loved.
It’s not enough for you
to know you love your own children.
They need to know it.
They will not know it
unless you find ways
to show your love to them.
And as with any gift,
there’s a responsibility to take care of it.
If we go back
to the 127th Psalm,
notice the illustration
that King Solomon uses
to explain this responsibility.
It’s in verses 4 and 5.
Psalm 127:4, 5,
it says: “Like arrows
in the hand of a mighty man,
“so are the sons of one’s youth.
“Happy is the man who fills
his quiver with them.
They will not be put to shame.”
So children
are likened to arrows
and parents
to mighty warriors.
So a warrior
will take the arrow
and he will carefully aim it
so he hits the target.
Well, it’s the same
with you parents.
We encourage you,
carefully direct your children
in a way that,
so to speak, you “hit the target”
so your children
can have a happy, fulfilling life
of serving Jehovah God.
So, what can help
you to do that?
Pray to Jehovah
to help you build
and maintain a strong relationship
with your children.
This closeness
will help them
to respond favorably
to your good direction.
Yes, the way you treat
your children is going to affect
not only their future
but your happiness as well.
Now, there are five suggestions
that might be of assistance
in building and maintaining
this strong relationship
with your children.
The first one:
Tell your children
you love them.
You might say,
“Well, that’s not the way I was raised.”
Well, maybe not.
But learn from the example
of Jehovah God
because Jehovah
openly expressed his affection
for his Son, Jesus.
And no matter how
you were brought up,
learn to express openly
your feelings
toward your children.
One father said this:
“I have found that children
are a bit like some flowers.
“Just as these little plants
turn toward the sun
“to receive light and warmth,
children look to their parents
“for love
and for reassurance
that they are
welcome members of the family.”
Don’t make your children
have to ask you,
“Mom, Dad,
do you love me?”
No, on a regular basis,
let your words support the fact
that you love them.
Now, another way to build
a strong relationship with your children is:
Give them your time.
That’s going to be a challenge
in the world we’re living in now.
But don’t you think your children
are worth meeting that challenge?
It’s going to require
good organization on your part
and maybe even
making some sacrifices
—giving up some things
that you enjoy doing.
But spend a lot of time
talking to your children,
eating with your children,
playing with your children.
It’s up to you parents
to figure out
how you can give
your time to your children.
A mother once asked
her children,
“If you could have
anything you wanted,
what would you like most?”
All four responded,
“More time
with Mom and Dad.”
Yes, show your children
how important
they are to you
by spending time with them.
But, you know,
there’s more that’s necessary
than just to be
physically around them.
That leads us
to our third suggestion:
Listen to your children
and acknowledge their feelings.
So when communicating
with your children,
don’t dominate
the conversations.
Let them talk.
Listen carefully
and respectfully.
Try to understand
how they feel.
And when they express themselves
and their emotions and their thoughts
(and sometimes,
maybe in extreme terms),
don’t respond in a similar way.
Proverbs 16:23 says:
“The heart of the wise one
gives his mouth insight.”
So parents, work hard
at patiently trying
to understand why your child
feels the way they do
and how you can be of help.
One father expressed
the matter this way,
“Since Jehovah allows me
to pour out my heart to him in prayer,
“I think it is only fair
that I allow my children
“to pour out their positive
and negative feelings to me.”
Also listen to your children
and acknowledge their feelings.
Now, the fourth suggestion
that may help to maintain
a strong relationship with your children is:
Do not expect
them to be adults.
Remember, the Bible says:
‘Through use
‘a person’s perceptive powers
are trained
to distinguish
between right and wrong.’
Well, that’s going to take time.
The Bible also speaks
of the “traits of a babe,”
the “foolishness” of boyhood,
and the “vanity” of adolescence.
So as your children
are going through these various stages,
recognize their limitations
and don’t expect them
to be little adults.
Now, the fifth suggestion:
When disciplining your children,
always show love
and discernment.
Now, this is supported
by Ephesians 6:4
because there it tells parents
‘not to be irritating your children,
‘but to bring them up
in the discipline
and admonition of Jehovah.’
So there’s no secret formula
on how to accomplish this,
especially
since every child is different.
So parents,
we encourage you, give thought
to the manner of your discipline,
always showing love
and discernment.
So there are five suggestion
that will help you to build
a strong relationship with your children
that will help them to respond
to your good training.
Now, what effect
will that have upon you parents?
Well, please read with me
Proverbs chapter 23,
verses 24 and 25
—Proverbs 23:24, 25.
It says: “The father of a righteous one
will surely be joyful;
“whoever fathers a wise son
will rejoice in him.
“Your father
and your mother will rejoice,
and she who gave birth
to you will be joyful.”
So the greatest joy
that a parent can have
is to see their children
turn out to be righteous
and wise servants
of Jehovah God.
It’s going to take time and effort
on your part to accomplish that.
But we encourage you,
don’t give up
on these precious gifts
that you have received from Jehovah.
As you watch
the following dramatization,
notice how the parents
rejoice in their children.
Thank you. I love you.
I love you too.
Showtime!
So the fire drill went off right
when we were having our math test.
Hey, Mom, Dad!
I’ve got to shower before our study.
Girls.
Oh, hey.
You need to finish the kitchen now.
No, we don’t have any time;
we just got home.
Yeah, we have to leave in 15 minutes.
No discussion, no excuses.
Now!
OK.
Thanks.
I did tell them to leave
the kitchen spotless, didn’t I?
Yeah.
They needed to hear that.
True.
It’s just overall they are . . .
I know. I know.
They were auxiliary pioneering
during the circuit overseer’s visit.
They really
put themselves out for others
including you—I mean, us.
I don’t ever want
to take them for granted.
Um, girls,
about the big mess earlier,
thanks for cleaning that up.
Your mom and I, we were upset.
But we really want you to know that, um . . .
. . . you are gifts from Jehovah
precious gifts we both cherish.
We love you very much.
What your Mom said.
Did you notice how the parents
rejoiced in their children?
Even though the daughters needed
some counsel and some discipline,
it didn’t overshadow
all their good qualities.
No, but these parents
made comments
like they never wanted
to take the girls for granted
and they cherished
these girls.
In fact, they openly expressed
that they loved them.
Now, it was apparent
this family had cultivated joy.
And we’re confident
that you as parents also are working hard
at cultivating joy
in your family.
Some things that will help you
are to be sure to tell
your children you love them,
give them your time,
listen to them,
acknowledge their feelings,
don’t expect them
to be adults,
and train them
with love and discernment.
These suggestions
are going to help you
to aim your children
to an everlasting future
of serving Jehovah God.
And as you put forth
all of this effort to assist your children,
you will be able
to rejoice in them
—these precious gifts
that you
have inherited from Jehovah.
Brother Ronald Curzan,
a helper to the Teaching Committee,
will now present
the final talk of this symposium,
“Cultivate Joy in Your Family
—Young Ones,
Rejoice in Your Parents.”
This symposium has helped us
to appreciate even more
Jehovah’s love
for families.
And we appreciate this gift,
the Bible,
which serves
as a blueprint for families
to have a loving,
warm, safe environment.
You young ones
play a vital role
in contributing
to the joy in your family life.
Your mother and your father
love you very much,
and they want to have a close,
personal, loving relationship with you.
And it’s
their heartfelt desire
that you have a close,
personal, loving relationship
with your heavenly Father, Jehovah.
They want you
to be happy now
and for the rest of your life
—everlasting life.
In the previous talk,
we understood how Jehovah wants
parents to train
their children.
But with what purpose?
Notice what Proverbs 22:6
gives as instructions
for parents.
There in verse 6, it reads:
“Train a boy
[or the footnote says, “child; youth”]
“in the way he should go;
even when he grows old
he will not depart from it.”
So, what is Jehovah
asking of your parents?
To train you
—to train you in such a way
that you will always serve
Jehovah from your youth
all the way
to your adulthood
and, really,
for the rest of your life.
So Jehovah doesn’t spell out
every single detail
for parents on how they should instruct
you and how they should train you.
That’s left up to them.
So they need to prayerfully think
about what would be best for your family
and for you
as a child personally.
This means that they
will make house rules.
Sometimes you’ll get chores,
maybe curfews.
You will get reminders,
correction, and discipline.
Why?
Because they love you
and because they’re doing their best
to listen and obey Jehovah,
and his instructions
are to train you
and discipline you so that you
can serve Jehovah forever.
It’s not an easy assignment.
They need all the help
that they can get from Jehovah
as well as from you,
especially when they make rules
that you may not like:
what you can and cannot wear,
what you can
and cannot listen to or watch,
or who you pick
as close friends.
These are decisions
that are left to your parents.
Now, will your parents always make
the perfect decision, the perfect rule?
No.
Breaking news:
It’s not news to you
that they will make mistakes.
They’re imperfect,
but they love you,
and they’re doing the best
they can to give you
the best training possible
so you can love Jehovah
and serve him forever.
We know that you
love and appreciate
all that your parents do for you,
but let’s be real.
Sometimes you don’t understand
the reason for the rule
or you simply don’t agree with it.
What do you do?
Well, you get frustrated.
But that’s OK.
We’ve been there.
We were your age
at one time,
and we completely understand
that it could be frustrating.
But we know
that this will pass
because you’ll understand
why they’re doing this.
It’s out of love.
So when you
don’t see eye to eye,
what are you supposed to do?
Well, sometimes you need
to change your view.
Much has to do with how
you view your parents.
How you view
your mother and your father
will affect how much
or how little
you respect them,
listen to them, and obey them.
And here’s a question
we’d like to pose to you children:
Do you sometimes
view your parents
as prison guards
or lifeguards?
Interesting question.
Prison guards are trained
to keep a close watch over prisoners
because they
don’t really trust them.
They keep them confined
with many restrictions.
They tell them what to do
and when to do it
—when to get up
and when to go to sleep,
what they will eat
and when they will eat,
what they will wear,
and all kinds of other rules.
They keep all these restrictions
because they don’t trust them.
Do you view your parents
as prison guards at times?
Well, you might,
especially if you want
more freedom
—more independence.
And if it seems like they
don’t really trust you
(they’re watching every single move
that you make),
you might feel confined
because of all the rules
and restrictions.
What about lifeguards?
Well, lifeguards also watch people;
they watch swimmers,
but for a very different reason.
They want
to keep them safe.
They want to make sure
that they do not swim into danger.
So from their lifeguard tower, they keep
a close watch over all the swimmers.
Sometimes they will use
their whistle to warn you of danger
—to keep away from riptides
or maybe sharks,
things that you’re not aware of.
Do you view
your parents as lifeguards?
We hope so
because they are.
It’s been said
that you could spend years
wishing your parents
would get off your back
only to realize
that they’re the only ones
who ever really had your back.
Yes, your parents,
like lifeguards,
are looking out
for your best interest.
They’ve always had your back,
and they always will.
They want to make sure that you will avoid
being drawn into the dangerous currents
in this wicked world
—dangers that you may not be aware of.
Do you want to be happier?
Do you want to have
more trust from your parents?
more freedom?
more independence?
If so, you might have to change
your view of your parents.
Don’t view them in a negative way
(like they’re prison guards),
but view them like lifeguards,
safeguarding your life.
Your parents
love you very much,
and their training
will pay off if you listen.
And that’s what Jehovah
is asking you to do.
While your parents
are training you,
you need to do your part
—and that is to listen.
And that’s what our scripture
at Proverbs chapter 23
has as an assignment for you.
That’s chapter 23
of Proverbs in verse 22.
And there, verse 22
says to you children:
“Listen to your father
who caused your birth,
“and do not despise
[or dislike]
your mother
just because she has grown old.”
So although it’s not easy at times,
what is Jehovah asking of you?
As your parents are training you,
please listen to them.
But what does it mean to listen?
Listening is more
than just hearing words.
It’s hearing
with a view to obeying.
Listening to your mother
and your father
means giving them
your full attention
—undivided attention.
It means turning off your music,
taking out your earbuds,
putting away your phone,
and avoiding rolling your eyes
when they’re speaking to you.
At times, you may get frustrated;
you may get upset.
That’s understandable.
We all do,
but how you control your emotions
will affect
the outcome in the future.
By listening
and obeying your parents,
you are building
a record of trust
that will help
you in the future
when you need to communicate with them,
maybe about rules.
Remember,
trust is something that you earn;
it’s not something that you demand
or that’s automatic.
What is the best way for you
to speak to your parents
about rules that you don’t understand
or maybe that you don’t agree with?
You need to communicate
—good, open communication.
Communication
doesn’t mean complaining,
shouting, whining,
maybe replying with sarcasm.
It means calmly telling
your parents how you feel.
Tell them what’s on your mind.
The following Bible verse
helps if we can apply it.
Proverbs 29:11 says:
“A stupid person
gives vent to all his feelings
“[It’s out of control—no control.],
but the wise one
calmly keeps them in check
[in control].”
That’s what we want
to try to follow.
A young woman named Devan tried to do this,
and this is what she advises.
She says,
“I found that when I stayed calm
“and presented
my thoughts clearly,
“I could count on
my parents to listen
“and either to reason
with me on their decision
or to come up
with another solution.”
Parents appreciate having
a real conversation with their children
rather than screaming matches
that end up with slamming doors.
Open communication
is what’s needed.
So you young ones,
what have we learned?
We have learned
how to view our parents correctly,
not as a prison guard,
but as a lifeguard
who really wants to save your life
—your everlasting life.
They have your back,
and they always will.
Listening and obeying strengthens
your relationship with your parents
as well as your heavenly Father, Jehovah.
It brings you joy
and brings joy to your parents.
And as you apply the training
that your parents are giving to you,
you will gain wisdom
that will help you now
to make wise decisions
so that you can have
the real life,
yes, everlasting life.
As you watch the concluding video
of this symposium,
please notice how these children
find joy in their parents.
Man, I’m so happy today because
that fire drill interrupted our math test.
But we have to do it tomorrow,
so I’m going to be
studying again all night.
Hey, Mom, Dad!
I’ve got to shower before our study.
No discussion, no excuses.
Now!
OK.
Where did all of this come from?
We’re going to be here all night.
It did give us time to think.
They are such good examples.
Mom never stops working.
And our home
is always, always beautiful.
They give us so much of their time
and themselves.
It’s a bit cheesy sometimes,
but overall, they’re pretty great.
That night, they didn’t lecture us.
They just reminded us of one thing.
And it was pretty deep.
When we dedicate our lives to Jehovah,
our lives include everything
—our time, our resources, our home,
our kitchen.
Yes, our kitchen.
And how we care for those things,
it reflects on him
and on us as your parents.
That kind of sank in.
I knew I could do better.
No, Mom.
We got this.
Um.
We got this?
Oh, yeah.
We got this.
Did you notice how the daughters
showed respect for their parents?
They did this by listening
and obeying their instructions.
What was the key?
It’s how they viewed
their parents.
They reflected
on their parents’ fine example
in the ministry and at home,
where they would take the time
and have the patience to help them,
to listen to them.
And they saw the joy
on their mother’s face
as she kept the home
clean and tidy.
What a good example!
They listened
to their parents’ advice,
and then they
made personal application.
They learned
that showing respect in the family
meant helping out with chores,
even when it meant
doing the dishes.
This made their parents happy
and the daughters happy as well.
In this symposium, we considered
how husbands and wives,
mothers and fathers,
and children can all add
and contribute to the success
of the joy within the family.
They do this
by working together in unity,
focusing on the positive things
in others
and having respect
for one another.
Yes, each in the family,
if they apply Bible principles
—use Jehovah’s blueprint—
they know that they can have
a successful and happy family.
And most of all,
we can make Jehovah happy
—give him honor
as the Designer,
the Architect,
and the Creator of all families.
Thank you, brothers,
for sharing that practical counsel.
May all family members continue to strengthen
their love and appreciation for one another.
We now invite you to stand
and sing song number 135,
entitled “Jehovah’s Warm Appeal:
‘Be Wise, My Son.’”
After the song,
there will be some announcements,
and if you wish, you may remain standing.
Again, that’s song number 135.